# NBA-PLAYER-TEAM-PROFILES-CS374

Note: For the most part, I am basing this project of basketball-reference.com. Most of my data comes from there. 
Data also comes from https://theccalderon.github.io/2019/12/11/scrapping-shots-basketball-reference.html#datasets

Overview of application:

This application is an NBA player and team profile website. The website features the ability to search up any player or team that was present in the 2019-2020 season. Once a player or team is chosen, the website will display the statistics and other supportive information about the player/team. From there, the user can lookup other teams or players, whether that be through the search bar again, or through various links that are generated by the website. The website also has a few tabs at the top where the user can view all teams, view all players, download data, or go back to the home page. 

System requirements:
1.	JavaScript – Very common and popular web scripting language
2.	HTML – Necessary for any website
3.	CSS – Used to style HTML
4.	Node.js – Very popular software that allows JavaScript to be run outside of a web browser. The project uses node package manager (NPM) to install important modules.
5.	SQLITE3 – DBMS library that is self-contained, installed via NPM
6.	Express JS – Node.js web server library. Allows HTTP requests.
7.	Nodemon – Node.js library that automatically restarts express web server when changes are detected.
8.	Python version 3.9.0 – Used to create and populate SQLITE3 databases.
9.	jQuery version 3.5.1 – Used to make HTTP requests from the client 
10.	Chart.js – JavaScript library that can make animated, interactive graphs
11.	Tabulator.js - JavaScript table generation library
12. Node.js File system - Node.js file system standard that is being used to automatically generate get requests for all fles in a specified folder and its subdirectories

Detailed description

1. Install node, dependencies,

Before trying to test the project, you must make sure that node.js is installed on your local machine as well as all project dependencies. Once node and its dependencies are installed, to be able to use the website, the express.js server must be running from a command line. To do this, you must first navigate to the directory containing the file “server.js”. Then you need to enter the command “node server.js”. Once this command is executed, the console should confirm that the server is running with a print statement saying that it is connected to the SQLITE3 database file.

2. Run the express.js localhost server

Once the server is running, you (which I will now refer to as the user), will need to head over to the link http://localhost:3000. Once the client connects to that URL, the express.js server will recognize that a get request is being made to its root and send the html file for the front-page. This initial html file sent to the user also include the relevant JavaScript and CSS files for it.
Once on this page, the user will be able to select one of the tabs at the top of the page or search something up in the search bar. This front page may also include extra features in the future. For example, it may display recent tweets from the official NBA twitter account if possible, or it may display a random player or team. 

3. Results of user interactions from the front page.
A. 
If the user decides to click on the “All players” or “All teams” tab at the top of the webpage, the client will make HTTP get requests to the server for the corresponding html, JavaScript, and CSS files. The html file is then displayed in the browser and then the JavaScript/CSS files run/are applied. The JavaScript file includes a function that will be ran once the html file is fully loaded. The function will first send a query string which retrieves all player/team information to the server via POST request to the root URL. Once this post request is sent, the server will execute a SQLITE3 query via the SQL string sent by the client and send the resulting data back to the client in JSON format. Once the client receives the JSON formatted data, the client will create a tabulator.js table object and fill it with the resulting query data. 
At this point, the page will consist of heading tabs, the search bar, and a table of all players/teams and their data in a table form. The user also can click on a player/team cell in which names are displayed as links. If the user decides to click on one of these cells, they will be sent the correct files and information. See step 3E or step 3F depending on whether it was a player or team.

B.
If the user decides to click on the “Download Data” tab, the client will make HTTP get requests to the server for the corresponding html and CSS files. The html file is then displayed in the browser and then the CSS file is applied. On this page, all the hyperlinks for the data I used to create my database are available. If the user clicks on one of the hyperlinks, they will download the data associated with it via HTTP get request. The search bar is also present on this page if the user wants to search for players/teams form there. Page also displays links to where project data is from and the project's GitHub repository.

C. If the user at any point decides at any point to click on the “Home Page” tab, the client will make the HTTP request as it did in step 2. This results in the client returning to the front page. 



D. If the user decides to click on the search bar, they will be able to input any text from their keyboard. This input will then used to generate a SQL string that will be sent to server via an HTTP post request. Once the server receives the data, it will send back the results of a SQLITE3 query. This is being done every time the user enters any input into the search bar. The input that the user will enter will either be player names or team names. The partial input will be ran through a query like stated above, and the data returned will be a list of players/teams whose names are similar to the user’s input. The data returned will then be concatenated to the search bar and will be clickable. If the user clicks on a player’s name, they will be taken to the player’s profile page (see step E). If the user clicks on a team name, they will be taken to the team’s profile page (see STEP F).

E. Once the user goes to a player’s profile page either via a search or a click on a table cell, they will be sent a generic player html file along with a JavaScript and CSS file. The way the file constructs personal player information is through the URL. For example, if the user wanted to go to the profile of “Lebron James”, the URL they would connect to would be http://localhost:3000/playerInfo.html#LeBron%20James. As you can see, “Lebron James” is passed into the URL after the character ‘#’. So once the user is connected to the URL, the JavaScript will run personalized queries based on the name of the player in the URL. Once the client is sent the correct files from the server and knows which player it will be querying data for, it will query said data, retrieve it, and then construct the following: One pie chart called the “Impact” chart which is a pie chart comprised of the player’s total points, rebounds, assists, blocks/steals, and turnovers/fouls; the goal here is to see what type of impact the player has. Six pie charts that show the ranking of the player in terms of points, assists, rebounds, steals, blocks, and turnovers. For example, if we were at the player “James Harden”, his pie chart would say he is ranked #1 in points. A shot chart of all the shots the player made/miss this season. A table of the player’s season totals. The user can click on every team the player played for in the season, and it will take them to the team page accordingly (see STEP F). The user has the option to select if they want to see a player's statistics/pie charts for certain fields: per game, per minute, or per 36 minutes. Once the user makes a selection, the player's table and pie charts will update accordingly.

F. Once the user goes to a team’s profile page either via a search or a click on a table cell, they will be sent a generic team html file along with a JavaScript and CSS file. The way the file constructs personal player information is through the URL. For example, if the user wanted to go to the profile of “Golden State Warriors”, the URL they would connect to would be http://localhost:3000/TeamInfo.html#Golden%20State%20Warriors. As you can see, “Golden State Warriors” is passed into the URL after the character ‘#’. So once the user is connected to the URL, the JavaScript will run personalized queries based on the name of the team in the URL. Once the client is sent the correct files from the server and knows which team it will be querying data for, it will query said data, retrieve it, and then construct the following: A table of all of the players on the roster, their position, age, and salary. The player name cells are clickable and will take you to the player’s profile (see STEP E). Two pie charts that display the ranks of the team in terms of points scored and points allowed. One larger pie chart that displays the impact of each player on the team for each major statistical category. The user will be able to select which pie chart they want with an input selector. 


